feat(datalist): initial design guidance (#10)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1009-datalist-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-16
updated: 2024-10-22
---

# Datalist Design Guidance

> The [datalist](https://clarity.design/documentation/datalist) is a type of list that becomes contextualized through the selection of extensive pre-defined filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [datalist](https://clarity.design/documentation/datalist) is a type of list that shows options based on selected filters, making it easier for users to find and select from a range of choices.
```

## Guidance

> - **Must** use a datalist when the user needs to choose from a long list of items to be filtered before selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a datalist when users need to choose from a long list of items that require filtering before selection. This helps users quickly find the options they need without feeling overwhelmed.
```

> - **Must** use a datalist when you have a pre-defined list of options, but the user needs to input a custom value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a datalist when there is a pre-defined list of options, but the user also needs the ability to input a custom value. This provides users with guidance while still allowing flexibility in their selections.
```

> - **Should** use a datalist when there are more than 13 options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a datalist when there are more than 13 options available. This helps keep the interface clean and manageable, allowing users to easily filter and select their desired option.
```

> - Use `error` and `success` states for a datalist to provide real-time feedback immediately after a user's input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use error and success states for a datalist to provide real-time feedback immediately after a user's input. This feedback helps users understand if their input is valid and enhances the overall user experience.
```
